Isaac Newton was was was born on Christmas 
Day in 1642, the year of Galileo’s death. 
When he entered Cambridge University 
in 1661 Newton didn’t know much 
mathematics, but he learned quickly 
by reading Euclid and Descartes and by 
attending the lectures of Isaac Barrow. 
Cambridge was closed because of the 
plague in 1665 and 1666, and Newton 
returned home to reflect on what he 
had learned. Those two years were 
amazingly productive for at that time 
he made four of his major discoveries: 
(1) his representation of functions as 
sums of infinite series, including the 
binomial theorem; (2) his work on differential and integral calculus; (3) his laws 
of motion and law of universal gravitation; and (4) his prism experiments on 
the nature of light and color. Because of 
a fear of controversy and criticism, he 
was reluctant to publish his discoveries 
and it wasn’t until 1687, at the urging 
of the astronomer Halley, that Newton 
published Principia Mathematica. In 
this work, the greatest scientific treatise 
ever written, Newton set forth his version of calculus and used it to investigate mechanics, fluid dynamics, and 
wave motion, and to explain the motion 
of planets and comets.
The beginnings of calculus are 
found in the calculations of areas and 
volumes by ancient Greek scholars such 
as Eudoxus and Archimedes. Although 
aspects of the idea of a limit are implicit 
in their “method of exhaustion,” Eudoxus 
and Archimedes never explicitly formulated the concept of a limit. Likewise, 
mathematicians such as Cavalieri, Fermat, and Barrow, the immediate precursors of Newton in the development of 
calculus, did not actually use limits. It 
was Isaac Newton who was the first to 
talk explicitly about limits. He explained 
that the main idea behind limits is that 
quantities “approach nearer than by 
any given difference.” Newton stated 
that the limit was the basic concept in 
calculus, but it was left to later mathematicians like Cauchy to clarify his ideas 
about limits.